## Before You Get Started ##

You need to have prior experience in OOP programming language such as C#, Java, etc. I believe that you can get the book's ideas just from reading the presented code. However, it is recommended to download and run all of the solutions on your machine. 

**As a bonus to the book, you can find video recordings with explanations for each chapter.** To get them, you can join for free the book's LinkedIn group. There you can find even more info about design patterns in automated testing and best practices or use it as an easy way to reach me. Before joining, you need to provide proof that you purchased the book. Just go to https://bit.ly/3eGTAUl

To build and execute the code, you will need a Java IDE, such as IntelliJ, Eclipse, or NetBeans. My preferred choice is IntelliJ. Also, it is recommended to install the latest version of the Java SDK. I show examples of new Java versions’ features through the book, so I encourage you to install the latest possible version. For software project management, I used Maven, and for unit testing framework TestNG, which means that depending on the IDE you picked, you will have to install the required plugins.

## Questions/Reader feedback/Errata ##

You can contact me at LinkedIn - [https://bit.ly/2NjWJ19](https://bit.ly/2NjWJ19) if you are having any problems with any aspect of the book, and I will do my best to address it.

## Foreword ##  
  
Since I usually skip the Foreword chapters of other books, I will try to be short. My core belief is that to achieve high-quality test automation that brings value- you need to understand core programming concepts such as SOLID and the usage of design patterns. After you master them, the usual career transition is into more architecture roles, such as choosing the best possible approaches for solving particular test automation challenges. This is the essence of the book. No more “Hello world” examples but some serious literature about test automation practices!  
P.S. After the first book's success, Design Patterns for High-Quality Automated Tests C# Edition, many people asked me when there will be a version for Java. This is why I started refreshing my Java knowledge and started writing. One year later, the book is here. More or less, the book explains the same concepts, but all code examples and specifics target the Java world. If you have read the C# edition, you can skip some of the more theoretical chapters or recheck them for a refresher.  
You may notice that I have changed the sub-title for those of you who have purchased the C# version. I believe that the new sub-title communicates much better the ideas of the book. I won't bother you with lengthy introductions and discussions about what clean code means. There are whole books about the subject. But if I had to summarize what clean code means in one sentence, I would say: "Clean code is code that is easy to understand and easy to change." Easy to understand means the code is easy to read, whether that reader is the original author of the code or somebody else. Its meaning is clear, so it minimizes the need for guesswork and the possibility of misunderstandings. It is easy to understand on every level. Easy to change means the code is easy to extend and refactor, and it's easy to fix bugs in the codebase. This can be achieved if the person making the changes understands the code and feels confident that the code changes do not break any existing functionality. I will end the intro with two quotes by two famous authors Robert C. Martin and Michael Feathers.
"If you want your code to be easy to write, make it easy to read."  
"Clean code always looks like it  
 
### Who Is This Book For?  ### 
The book is not a getting started guide. If you don't have any prior programming experience in writing automated tests through WebDriver, this book won't be very useful to you. I believe it might be invaluable for the readers that have a couple of years of experience and whose job is to create/maintain test automation frameworks, or to write high-quality reliable automated tests.  
The book is written in Java. However, I believe that you can use the approaches and practices in every OOP language. If you have a Python background, you will get everything you need, don't worry. However, if you are a C# developer, I would suggest checking the book's C# version.  
Even if you don't get all the concepts from the first read, try to use and incorporate some of them. Later you can return and reread them. I believe with the accumulation of experience using high-quality practices- you will become a hard-core test automation ninja!

## What this book covers ##  
### Chapter 1. Defining High-Quality Test Attributes  ###
I think many terms are misunderstood and engineers are using them without fully understanding them, such as a library, framework, test framework. I believe this is the basic knowledge that all test engineers should have. The reader will learn about the top-quality attributes each test library should strive to have, which we will discuss in much more detail in the next chapters. Moreover, since we want to treat the test code as production one, we will talk about SOLID principles and how we can incorporate them into the development of the tests.  
###  Chapter 2. Optimizing and Refactoring Legacy Flaky Tests  ### 
We will discuss the Hermetic test pattern where each test should be isolated from others. Will learn about the Adapter design pattern where some of the unstable behaviours of WebDriver will be wrapped in a class and fixed. The same pattern will be used to improve the WebDriver API for locating elements and making it easier to use. Finally, we will talk about the random run order principle where the tests should be able to run no matter their order.  
###  Chapter 3. Strategies for Speeding-up the Tests  ### 
After the tests are stabilized and always passing the next step is to improve their speed. One of the approaches will be login to a website through cookies instead of using the UI. Next, the readers will see how to reuse the WebDriver browser instead of restarting it all the time earning more than 40% decrease in test execution time. We will talk about how to handle asynchronous requests and make test code parallelizable. Finally, we will mention the “Black Hole Proxy” approach isolating 3rd party services’ requests while further improving the speed of the automated tests.  
###  Chapter 4. Test Readability  ### 
Learn how to hide nitty-gritty low-level WebDriver API details in the so-called page objects, making the tests much more readable. Also, the readers will see how to create two different types of page objects depending on their needs. In the second part of the chapter, we will talk about coding standards - naming the variables and methods right, as well as placing the correct comments. At the end of the section, we will discuss various tools that can help us to enforce all these standards.  
### Chapter 5. Enhancing the Test Maintainability and Reusability  ### 
We will talk about how to reuse more code across page objects by using the Template Method design pattern. Also, we will see a 3rd type of page object model where the assertions and elements will be used as properties instead of coming from base classes, which will introduce the benefits of the composition over the inheritance principle. In the second part of the chapter, we will discuss how to reuse common test workflows through the Facade design pattern. At the end of the section, we will talk about an enhanced version of the pattern where we can test different versions of the same web page (new and old).  
### Chapter 6. API Usability  ### 
In this chapter, we will learn how to make the test library API easy to use, learn, and understand. First, we will talk about different approaches on how to use already developed page object models through the Singleton design pattern or Factory design pattern. After that, we will look at another approach called Fluent API or Chaining Methods. At the end of the section, we will discuss whether it is a good idea to expose the page objects elements to the users of your test library.  
### Chapter 7. Building Extensibility in Your Test Library  ### 
If you create a well-designed library, most probably other teams can start using it too, so you need to be sure that your library is easily extensible. It should allow everyone to modify it and add new features to it without causing you to spend tons of time rewriting existing logic or making already written tests to fail. In this chapter, the reader will learn how to improve extensibility for finding elements by creating custom selectors through the Strategy design pattern. After that, we will investigate ways on how we can add additional behaviors to existing WebDriver actions via Observer design pattern or built-in EventFiringWebDriver.  
### Chapter 8. Assessment System for Tests’ Architecture Design  ### 
In this chapter, we will look into an assessment system that can help you decide which design solution is better- for example, to choose one between 5 different versions of page objects. We will talk about the various criteria of the system and why they are essential. In the second part of the section, we will use the system to evaluate some of the design patterns we used previously and assign them ratings.  
### Chapter 9. Benchmarking for Assessing Automated Test Components Performance  ### 
The evaluation of core quality attributes is not enough to finally decide which implementation is better or not. The test execution time should be a key component too. In this chapter, we will examine a library that can help us measure the performance of our automated tests’ components.  
### Chapter 10. Test Data Preparation and Configuring Test Environments  ### 
One of the essential parts of each automated test is the test data which we use in it. It is important that the data is relevant and accessible. In the chapter, we will discuss how we can create such data through fixtures, APIs, DB layers or custom tools. Also, we will review how to set up the right way the environment in which the tests run.  
###  Appendix 1. Defining the Primary Problems that Test Automation Frameworks Solve  ### 
In the first appendix chapter, we will define the problems that the automation framework is trying to solve. To determine what is needed to deliver high-quality software, we need to understand what the issues are in the first place.  
### Appendix 2. Most Exhaustive CSS Selectors Cheat Sheet  ### 
A big part of the job of writing maintainable and stable web automation is related to finding the proper element's selectors. Here will look into a comprehensive list of CSS selectors.  
### Appendix 3. Most Exhaustive XPath Selectors Cheat Sheet  ### 
The other types of very useful locators are the XPath ones. Knowing them in detail can help you significantly improve the stability and the readability of your tests.  
